---
title: "LIPO charger 🔋 | Part 1: Defining the capabilities"
lang: en
author: Andreas Kohler
date: 14th of August, 2021
description: "Designing a standalone LIPO charging system, part 1."
keywords:
  - hardware
  - charger
  - battery
article:
  link: https://notes.andi-makes.dev/2021-08-14-charger1/
  author-link: https://andi-makes.dev/

---

Welcome to my little LIPO charger desing series! Here I'll document the process
of me designing a charger from scratch. Let's get started by defining the 
featureset of the circuit!

Before you can build something, you need to know *what* it should be able to do.
Let's try to answer some simple questions to find out together what my charger 
board should be able to do.

## What is it? ❓
A LIPO charger for some recycled 1.3Ah cells. I want to power it using USB C.
I will only charge one of those cells at a time.

## How much current should it be able to handle? 🌩️
Because I'll be charging 1.3Ah cells, the maximum current I'd be comfortable 
charging the cells with would be 650mA, according to the 0.5C rule.

As another requirement is USB C, I will settle on 500mA for the charging current,
because that is easily supported by the USB C spec.

## Input 🔌
I want to use USB C for the charger. The advantage is that the product will be 
easy to use, just plug it in and it will magically work.

The disadvantage is that the PCB design will be slightly more complex. Luckily
for me, I just recently designed a USB C powered device, so I can reuse most of 
the previous circuit.

Of course the input *has* to be protected and up to the USB specs, even if the
resulting product is just a one-off board for private use. I see it as a small
challange! 😄

## What type of charger? Switching or Linear?
A switching regulator *would* be fancy, but I think a linear one is good enough 
for 500mA charging currents. Also, switching regulators are more complicated than
linear ones and I want to keep it simple.

## Conslusion 🏁
Let's summarize the above answers to the questions. I need:
 - a single cell linear charger ic,
 - capable of delivering 500mA,
 - which gets powered by a well protected USB C input circuitry.

When planning a new project, *always* ask yourself questions what the finished 
product should look like. If you clearly define *what* you want beforehand,
it'll be easier to finish said new project! That's because you *know exactly*
when it is finished.

In the next note in this series, we will take a look at choosing the best suited
parts for this project. Stay tuned and take care!
