---
title: New Website using pandoc
lang: en
author: Andreas Kohler
date: 2nd of March, 2022
description: "How I generate my websites from markdown using pandoc"
keywords:
  - pandoc 
  - makefile
  - ssh
  - website
article:
  link: https://notes.andi-makes.dev/2022-03-02-new-site/
  author-link: https://andi-makes.dev/

---

I wasn't happy with my old website. I didn't like the design anymore.
I didn't like the fact that I'm using [a self written webserver](https://github.com/andi-makes/oxyserve) just for
serving a static site. I didn't like that it wasn't super easy to publish a new note.
Well, all of this changed.

So, I set out to improve my websites. Some goals I had in mind:

 * Text must be written in markdown
 * Simplify the design of the website
 * Make it [gruvbox themed](https://github.com/morhetz/gruvbox)
 * Make it easy to upload a new version of the website
 * Let nginx serve the static site

# Introducing: pandoc
If you plan on writing text in markdown and then convert it to any other
file format, make sure you [check out pandoc](https://pandoc.org/).
Like their website says:

> If you need to convert files from one markup format into another, pandoc is your swiss-army knife.

To convert a markdown file into a HTML file, you'd need to execute the following command:

```sh
pandoc my-markdown-file.md -o barebones.html
```

This generates a relatively barebones HTML file, containing no boilerplate. But of course the developers
have provided a possibility to use a template, with the easiest option being:

```sh
pandoc -s my-markdown-file.md -o standalone.html
```

The `-s` stands for, you've guessed it, a standalone file. This gives you a HTML file with some
CSS applied - basically you could leave it at that and be happy with that website.
For further information on how to personalize your website, make sure to check out the [pandoc manual](https://pandoc.org/MANUAL.html) - a really valuable ressource. To give you some starting points at what arguments I specified:

 * `-s` to make a standalone site
 * `--wrap=preserve` so that pandoc doesn't insert newlines where I don't want it (Wrapping caused problems with the formatting of metadata)
 * `--highlight-style=my.theme` to make codeblocks use the gruvbox theme, [get the source code I based my theme upon from here](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/KDE/syntax-highlighting/master/data/themes/gruvbox-dark.theme)
 * `--template=template.html` to specify my own template html
 * `--css=/style.css` to specify the adress of the css file

# Managing everything
I thought to myself: "Well, now I have to compile all note files. Doing this by hand is tedious. 
Writing a shell script that *always* recompiles *every* file is inefficient. Sounds like a makefile
is the ideal solution to this problem!"

So, I sat down and write a makefile. Basic stuff, specify a list of input files, define a target rule
of how to compile them. Done. You can take a look at [the GitHub repository](https://github.com/andi-makes/notes) for the current version of
my makefile.

# Uploading the website
I updated my old website using a private repository and GitHub actions using a self hosted runner.

I don't need to tell you that that wasn't really a nice workflow.
If it worked, I simply had to git push and the website would update.
*If* it worked. A lot of times the GitHub actions runner wasn't really working,
I had to ssh into my server, try to fix it, re-issue the action.

Now, after reading [this article by Drew DeVault](gemini://drewdevault.com/2022/02/17/tar-is-good-actually.gmi)
(if you want to read the article yourself, you'll need [a gemini client](https://gemini.circumlunar.space/clients.html)), I was amazed.
In this article, Drew uses (a more complex variant) of this command:

```sh
ssh hostname tar -cz folder | tar -xzv
```

This command ssh's into the server and executes the tar command on the folder on the server. The resulting tar gets piped
to the tar command on your own computer to extract it again. Genius.

After tinkering around with it a little bit more, I came up with this command:
```sh
tar -cz -C output . | ssh web@andi-makes.dev "rm -rf $(SERVER_DIR) && mkdir $(SERVER_DIR) && tar -xzv -C $(SERVER_DIR) --no-same-permissions
```

It basically just uploads the generated files to some directory specified by the `$(SERVER_DIR)` variable.
To make sure I have no old files lying around, I delete the directory and create it from scratch again.
I integrated this into my makefile, so to upload the new contents I only have to execute `make upload` - done.
All I had to do now is to tell nginx to serve the files. And that's it.

# Future plans
I'd like to also generate a Website suitable for other web protocols such as [gopher](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gopher_(protocol)) or [gemini](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Gemini_(protocol)).
Not because someone would use them, but just as a little programming exercise.

Thank you for reading!

